{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\f0\fs72\lang9\par
BRAINSTORM\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\fs44 Why\par
\b0\fs32 Brainstorming is a great way to generate a lot of ideas that you would not be able to generate by just sitting down with a pen and paper. The intention of brainstorming is to leverage the collective thinking of the group, by engaging with each other, listening, and building on other ideas.Conducting a brainstorm also creates a distinct segment of time when you intentionally turn up the generative part of your brain and turn down the evaluative part. Brainstorming is the most frequently practiced form of ideation.\par
Here, you\rquote ll learn the best practices from the very best experts from d.school and IDEO as well of the father of the Brainstorming technique, Alex Osborn. The following are some rules, principles,and suggestions so you can make brainstorming sessions much more user-oriented, effective,innovative \f1\endash  and fun.\par
\b\fs36 When\par
\b0\fs32 You can use brainstorming throughout any design or work process, of course, to generate ideas\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 for design solutions, but also any time you are trying to generate ideas, such as planning where to\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 do empathy work, or thinking about product and services related to your project.\par
\b\fs40 Rules\par
\fs36 Set a time limit\par
\b0 d.school emphasises that the facilitator has to be intentional about setting aside a periodwhen your team will be in \ldblquote brainstorm mode\rdblquote . In this time frame, it\rquote s the sole goal to comeup with as many ideas as possible, and during this period judgements of those ideas areprohibited. Typically, a Brainstorm will take around 15-60 minutes. It can be shorter orlonger, depending on the difficulty of the problem and the motivation and experience of thgroup.\b\par
\fs40 Best practice tip\par
\fs28\ldblquote Invest energy into a short period of time, such as 15 or 30 minutes of high engagement.Get in front of a whiteboard or around a table, but take an active posture of standing orsitting upright. Get close together.\rdblquote  \par
\fs36 Start with a problem statement, Point of View, How Might We questions, a plan or a goal \endash\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 and stay focused on\f0\lang1033  the topic\par
\b0\f1\fs32\lang9 Alex Osborn, the father of the Brainstorming technique, emphasises that brainstorming\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 sessions should always address a specific question or problem statement (also called a\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 Point of View) as sessions addressing multiple questions are inefficient. Begin with a good\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 problem statement or question. Design Thinkers and other ideation specialists have further\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 developed this approach into the art of framing problem statements via methods.\par
Specifically, these are \b\fs28\ldblquote How Might We\rdblquote  \b0\fs32 questions. \b\fs36  \b0\fs32\par
\b\f0\fs36\lang1033 Best practice tip:\par
\fs28\ldblquote Write down clearly what you are brainstorming. Using a \lquote How Might We\rquote  (HMW) question is a great way to frame a brainstorm (e.g. HMW give each shopper a personal checkout experience?).\rdblquote\par
\fs36 Defer judgement or criticism, including non-verbal\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0\fs32 The facilitator should always set a positive, unthreatening tone and tell participants to reserve criticism for a later critical stage in the ideation process. A Brainstorming session is not the time and the place to evaluate ideas, and you should avoid executional details. It\rquote s crucial that participants are feeling confident by being in a safe environment so they have no fear of being judged by others when they put forward wild ideas. You should create equal opportunities for all participants. The best ideas often come from practitioners,students, and people who dare to think differently \f1\endash  and not necessarily only from the\f0  \f1 highly skilled and experienced managers. \b\f0\fs36\par
\fs28\ldblquote Have playful rules: Critiquing or debating ideas can quickly sap the energy of a session.Many IDEO conference rooms have brainstorming rules stenciled in 6-inch-high letters on the walls; for example, \lquote Go for quantity,\rquote  \lquote Encourage wild ideas,\rquote  \lquote Defer judgment,\rquote  or \lquote One conversation at a time.\rquote\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\fs36 Best practice tip: \par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0\fs32 The facilitator should suspend judgement. This way, participants will feel free to generate unusual ideas. As a facilitator, you will find that it can\b\fs36  \b0\fs32 even be a great idea to prohibit the word \b\fs28\ldblquote no\rdblquote\b0\fs32 . You\rquote ll be surprised to see how effective this tool is and how it helps open up minds and creates a collaborative, curious, and friendly ideation environment. And you\rquote ll find that it\rquote s pretty fun too when team members have to initially say \b\fs28\ldblquote yes\rdblquote  \b0\fs32 to even the weirdest ideas. Giving out half-thought-out ideas or strange suggestions is normally notsocially accepted, is socially frowned on and leads to people holding back in normal situations. Brainstorming deliberately gives permission to be \b\fs28 "stupid" \b0\fs32 and \b\fs28\ldblquote child-like\rdblquote\b0\fs32 .\par
\b\fs28\ldblquote Creative spaces don't judge. They let the ideas flow, so that people can build on each other and foster great ideas. You never know where a good idea is going to come from, the key is make everyone feel like they can say the idea on their mind and allow others to build on it.\rdblquote\par
\fs40 Encourage weird, wacky, and wild ideas\fs28\par
\b0\fs32 These new ways of thinking might give you better solutions.\par
\b\fs28 "It is easier to tone down a wild idea than to think up a new one.\rdblquote\par
\b0\fs32\ldblquote Wild ideas can often give rise to creative leaps. In thinking about ideas that are wacky or out there we tend to think about what we really want without the constraints of technology or materials. We can then take those magical possibilities and perhaps invent new technologies to deliver them.\rdblquote\par
\b\fs36 Aim for quantity\fs32\par
\b0 Aim for as many new ideas as possible. The assumption is that the greater the number of ideas you generate, the bigger your chance is of producing a radical and effective solution.Brainstorming celebrates the maxim \b\fs28\ldblquote quantity breeds quality\rdblquote\b0\fs32 .\par
\b\fs36 Build on each others' ideas\par
\b0\fs32 As suggested by the slogan \b\ldblquote 1+1=3", \b0 Brainstorming stimulates the building of ideas by a process of association. Embrace the most out-of-the-box notions and build, build, build. Be positive and build on the ideas of others. Brainstorming works well when participants use each other's ideas to trigger their own thinking. Our minds are highly associative. One thought easily triggers another. When we use the thoughts of others, then these will stop us getting trapped by our own thinking structures.\par
\b\fs36 Best practice tip: \par
\b0\fs32 Try to say and encourage others to say \b\fs28\ldblquote and\rdblquote  \b0\fs32 instead of \b\fs28\ldblquote but\rdblquote\b0\fs32 . It takes practice, but this little trick works surprisingly well. \par
\b\fs36 Be visual\fs32\par
\fs36 Best practice tip:\par
\b0\fs32 At IDEO, they encourage you to use coloured markers to write on Post-its and put them on the wall\f1\emdash or sketch your idea. Nothing gets an idea across faster than drawing it. It doesn\rquote t\f0  \f1 matter how terrible of a sketcher you are! It's all about the idea behind your sketch. And\f0  \f1 d.school has two great ideas for you:\par
\ldblquote There are at least two ways to capture the ideas of a brainstorming:\par
1. Scribe: the scribe legibly and visually captures on the board ideas that team members\f0  \f1 call out. It is very important to capture every idea, regardless of your own feelings about\f0  \f1 each idea.\par
2. All-in: Each person will write down each of his or her ideas as they come, and verbally\f0  \f1 share it with the group. It is great to do this with post-it notes, so you can write your idea\f0  \f1 and then stick it on the board.\rdblquote\par
\b\fs36 One conversation at a time\par
\b0\fs32 Listen to each other and elaborate on each other\rquote s ideas. Don\rquote t get obsessed with your own\f0  \f1 ideas. You\rquote re here to ideate together. When all team members have presented their ideas,\f0  \f1 you can select the best ideas, which you can continue to build and elaborate on in other\f0  \f1 ideation sessions. There are various methods you can use such as \b\fs28\ldblquote Post-it Voting\rdblquote , \ldblquote Four\f0  \f1 Categories\rdblquote , \ldblquote Bingo Selection\rdblquote , \ldblquote Six Thinking Hats\rdblquote , and \ldblquote Now Wow How Matrix\rdblquote . \b0\fs32\par
\b\f0\fs36    WHAT   IS IDEATION?\par
\b0\fs32 Ideation essentially refers to the whole creative process of coming up with and communicating new ideas. Ideation is innovative thinking, typically aimed at solving a problem or providing a more efficient means of doing or accomplishing something. It encompasses thinking up new ideas, developing existing ideas, and figuring out means or methods for putting new ideas into practice.\par
In the business world, ideation is associated with things such as inventing and/or developing new products or services or creating new means or methods of production or delivery of products or services. Amazon\rquote s \b\ldblquote Prime\rdblquote  \b0 two-day delivery service is an example of ideation being used to address the question of how to serve consumers more efficiently.\par
Ideation is frequently part of what is known as the \b\ldblquote design process,\rdblquote\b0  which is the process of developing a plan for producing a new product or creating a new operating system. It may also include detailing or mapping out precisely how a new system or process will be implemented.\par
\b\fs28\par
\fs40 HOW  IT WORK IDEATION?\par
\fs28      Ideation may present itself in any one of a wide variety of ways and are Several different forms that ideation may take, including the following:\par
1. \b0\fs32 Derivative Solving Problems \f1\endash  Ideation is often specifically aimed at problem-solving. For example, production managers at a company may be charged with coming up with ideas on how to reduce production costs.\par
\b\f0\fs28 2. \b0\fs32 Derivative Ideation \f1\endash  Derivative ideation refers to building on an existing idea, such as developing complementary products or accessories to sell along with a company\rquote s main product.\par
\b\f0\fs28 3. \b0\fs32 Innovation \f1\endash  An example of innovation ideation is the process of a pharmaceutical company developing new medicines. Such a type of ideation often involves doing extensive research and experimentation as part of the ideation process.\par
\b\f0\fs28 4. \b0\f1\fs32 Development of a \b\ldblquote Revolutionary Idea\rdblquote  \b0\endash  Ideation sometimes ends up creating a totally new line of thought or set of ideas, such as the development of a new philosophy.\par
\b\f0\fs28 5\b0\fs32 . Serendipitous Ideation \f1\endash  Serendipitous ideation refers to situations where someone just happens to come up with a new idea even though they weren\rquote t consciously trying to do so.\par
\b\f0\fs28 6\b0\fs32 . Combination Ideation \f1\endash  Ideation often includes combining multiple ideas to create a new process or way of doing something.\par
\f0\par
\b\fs36 IDEATION  AND  BRAINSTROMING\fs28\par
                  \b0\fs32 Ideation is often closely related to the practice of brainstorming, a specific technique that is utilized to generate new ideas. A principal difference between ideation and brainstorming is that ideation is commonly more thought of as being an individual pursuit, while brainstorming is almost always a group activity. Brainstorming is usually conducted by getting a group of people together to come up with either general new ideas or ideas for solving a specific problem or dealing with a specific situation.\par
Participants in a brainstorming session are encouraged to freely toss out whatever ideas may occur to them. The thinking is that by generating a large number of ideas, the brainstorming group is likely to come up with a suitable solution for whatever issue they are addressing.\par
The lines between ideation and brainstorming have become a bit more blurred with the development of several brainstorming software programs, such as Bright idea and Ideawake. These software programs are designed to encourage employees of companies to generate new ideas for improving the companies\rquote  operations and, ultimately, bottom-line profitability.\par
The programs often combine the processes of ideation and brainstorming in that individual employees can use them, but companies may simulate brainstorming sessions by having several employees all utilize the software to generate new ideas intended to address a specific purpose.\par
\b\fs44 History of Brainstorming:\par
\b0\fs32 The term Brainstorming is used and popularized by Alex Faickney Obsorn in 1953 through the book Applied Imagination. In this book Obsorn presented the Brainstorming method and effective rules for brainstorming session. When he was jobless, he worked as press reporter, he also wrote book but  publisher rejected his book because of old ideas. Publisher told him his book was not new, lacking in creative ideas. Later Osborn started his own advertisement company to provide new creative ideas. Osborn organized studies of group discussions to solve problems in 1939. He was frustrated by employees\rquote  inability to develop creative ideas. He began mass group thinking sessions and discovered significant improvement in the ideas produced by employee. Many experiential studies have been conducted regarding group idea generation. Some studies have ignored a few basic issues framed by inventor of the tool.\par
\par
\b\fs40 Advantages of Brainstorming: \fs28\par
1 .\b0\fs32 Encourage creativity: brainstorming generate a lot of ideas, It\par
encourages creativity of organization. It expands members thinking to produce maximum ideas on problem. It can give number of options.Ideas are formed collectively not individually\b\fs28 .\par
2. \b0\fs32 Production of large number of ideas: group discussion is organized;facilitator motivates to offer to produce maximum ideas in less time from participant members. It helps to record maximum ideas.\par
\b\fs28 3. \b0\fs32 Involvement of all group members; It is important to produce each participants own idea on particular problem, it dose not criticize or evaluates so it encourages member to produce idea.\par
\b\fs28 4. \b0\fs32 Sense of ownership: Group members are actively participating in brainstorming process. It creates ownership sense to discussion and produce ideas related problem\b\fs28\par
5. \b0\fs32 Provide input to other tools: brainstorming results are also used in other tools, databases, standardization etc. Generated ideas can be used elsewhere.\par
\b\fs28 6. \b0\fs32 You don't have to be a highly qualified expert or highly paid consultant to use it.\b\fs28\par
7. Easy to prepare, implement, understand - it's not a complicated\par
technique\par
8. Save Time and money: Brainstorming is inexpensive. It does not need\par
a lot of materials. (only paper and pens are needed). It save the time.\par
9. \b0\fs32 It is fun and exciting.\par
Problem solving process:\par
When problem is identified then brainstorming can used to solve or find out solution of raised problem. Following steps are involved in problem.\par
\b\fs36 Solving Process.\par
\b0\fs28 1.\b  \b0\fs32 Problem identification\par
2. Problem definition\par
3. Problem analysis\par
4. Identifying causes\par
5. Find out the root causes\par
6. Data analysis\par
7. Solution generation\par
8. Identifying resistances\par
9. Plan for solution implementation\par
10. Implementation\par
11. Observation\par
12. Standardization\par
\par
}
 